The current functionTests test harness needs adjustment for running on non-ASCII systems like zOS.
Currently, when using derbyTesting.jar built for instance on a windows or linux system on zOS the tests do not run, because the properties and runall files cannot be understood. 
Until now, testers on zOS had to unjar derbyTesting.jar, then run native2ascii -Cp 1047 -reverse on all appropriate files (.sql, .txt, .out, .properties, .runall, .asc, .exclude, etc). 
This is a labor intensive and error prone process. Furthermore, it causes test failures such as reported with DERBY-575, because tests may assume a certain file to be a specific length, which no longer holds true after the native2ascii conversion.

The test harness should get modified to always read the files in the same encoding.

Note however, that the comparison of actual .out and the master should still result in files readable on the local system, to enable a human to evaluate failures and results. At the same time, this raises the concern that someone might check-in an update to the master with an incorrect encoding.

To resolve the main issue, I propose the following:

	Set the default encoding in the harness.
	for each test
1)  determine if the test encoding is set. We can probably use ij.ui.codeset - otherwise a new property is needed.
     Note that this means that .properties, .runall and .exclude  files are always read in fixed/default encoding.
2) read the master/sql files in in the default/fixed encoding unless the encoding property is set for a test
3) Write the output out in the local encoding (the way is done currently) unless the encoding property is set (if set, write out in that encoding)
4) Change the code that creates tmpmstr to always apply instead of only for networkserver. tmpmstr files will be created in the local encoding.
5) Have FileCompare  read tmpmstr in in the local encoding for the comparison.
6) either document that test development/adjustment need to be at least be verified on an ascii system, or add another property that causes a copy of the actual output to be created in the default/fixed encoding.

