Currently Derby space reclamation is initiated after all the rows on a 
MAIN page are delted.  When blob/clob's larger than a page are involved
the row on the main page only keeps a pointer to a page chain, so the
main page rows can be very small and thus may take a lot of rows to be
deleted before we clean up and reuse space associated with blob/clob.
So in an extreme case of a table with only a int key and a 1 blob column
with N bytes , and a 32k 
page derby probably stores more than 1000 rows.  If the app simply does
insert/delete of a single row it will grow to 1000 * N bytes
for an app that to the user should only be on the order of N big.

It would seem reasonable to queue a post commit for any delete which
includes a blob/clob that has been chained.  This is in keeping with
the current policy to queue the work when it is possible we can reclaim
an entire page.  

The problem is that there would be an extra cost at delete time to 
determine if the row being deleted has a blob/clob page chain.  The
actual information is stored in the field header of that particular
column so currently the only way to check would be to check every
field header of every column in the deleted row.  From the store's
point of view every column can be "long" with a page chain – currently
it doesn't know that only blob/clob datatypes can cause this behavior.

Some options include:

1 at table create time ask for input from language to say if one of
  these is at all possible, so that check is never done if not 
  necessary.
2 Maintain a bit in the container header with some sort of indication if any long
    row exists, may simply 1/0 or a reference count.   Note information is easily
     available at insert time.
3 maintain a bit in the page indicating if any long rows exist
4 maintain a bit in the record header if any long columns exist,  note the existing bit
    is only if the whole record is overflowed, not if a single column is overflowed.

options 1-3 would then be used to only perform the slow check at delete time if  necessary.

I don't really like option 1 unless we change the storage interface to actually check/guarantee the behavior.

I lean toward option 4, but it is sort of a row format change.  Given that the system has room saved for this
bit I believe we can use it without any sort of upgrade-time work necessary - though I believe it can only be set on a
hard upgrade as there may be old code which does not expect it to be set.  Soft upgrades won't get the
benefit and existing data won't get the benefit.

Any other ideas out there?